⚡ Bolt: [performance improvement] Convert reflection Bindings to compiled x:Bind (#389)
mikekthx/Launchbox: .jules/bolt.md

## 2026-04-20 - Optimize ShortcutService extension lookups
**Learning:** Using `IReadOnlyList<string>.Contains` with `StringComparer.OrdinalIgnoreCase` inside an `Enumerable.Where` loop results in an O(N*M) time complexity. For large directories and extension lists, this can be slow.
**Action:** Replace `IReadOnlyList<string>.Contains` with a pre-instantiated `HashSet<string>` using `StringComparer.OrdinalIgnoreCase`. This turns the O(N*M) lookup into O(N), bringing significant performance gains (e.g., from 703ms down to 306ms in our benchmark).

## 2026-04-21 - Convert reflection-based Bindings to x:Bind in DataTemplates
**Learning:** In WinUI 3 XAML DataTemplates, replacing standard reflection-based `{Binding}` with compiled `{x:Bind}` eliminates runtime reflection overhead, which is especially noticeable for properties evaluated per item (like Visibility converters or AutomationProperties).

> **Action:** Use `{x:Bind PropertyName}` instead of `{Binding}` for data context properties within `DataTemplate`s. Note that `x:Bind` defaults to `Mode=OneTime` in WinUI. Add `Mode=OneWay` when the bound property is mutable after initial render. For stable references (e.g., the DataContext object itself, `init`-only properties, names set once at load), `Mode=OneTime` is more efficient and should be preferred.

Reviewer: The phrase "Add `Mode=OneWay` when the bound property is mutable after initial render" is imprecise — this same PR uses `OneTime` for `TappedCommandParameter="{x:Bind}"` where the bound object (`AppItemGroup`) is itself mutable. The deciding factor is whether the **bound value** (what the expression evaluates to) will change after the initial bind, not whether the source property/object supports mutation.

@mikekthx raised exactly this in the earlier thread. The suggested rewording from that thread still applies:

```suggestion
**Action:** Use `{x:Bind PropertyName, Mode=OneWay}` for data context properties within `DataTemplate`s when the bound value can change after initial rendering. `x:Bind` defaults to `Mode=OneTime` — add `Mode=OneWay` only when you need live updates. For values that are stable within the template lifetime (e.g. the DataContext object itself, `init`-only properties, names set once at load), keep the `OneTime` default; do not add `Mode=OneWay` unnecessarily.
```

## 2026-04-20 - Optimize ShortcutService extension lookups
**Learning:** Using `IReadOnlyList<string>.Contains` with `StringComparer.OrdinalIgnoreCase` inside an `Enumerable.Where` loop results in an O(N*M) time complexity. For large directories and extension lists, this can be slow.
**Action:** Replace `IReadOnlyList<string>.Contains` with a pre-instantiated `HashSet<string>` using `StringComparer.OrdinalIgnoreCase`. This turns the O(N*M) lookup into O(N), bringing significant performance gains (e.g., from 703ms down to 306ms in our benchmark).
## 2026-04-21 - Convert reflection-based Bindings to x:Bind in DataTemplates
**Learning:** In WinUI 3 XAML DataTemplates, replacing standard reflection-based `{Binding}` with compiled `{x:Bind}` eliminates runtime reflection overhead, which is especially noticeable for properties evaluated per item (like Visibility converters or AutomationProperties).

> **Action:** Use `{x:Bind PropertyName, Mode=OneWay}` instead of `{Binding}` for data context properties within `DataTemplate`s. Note that `x:Bind` defaults to `Mode=OneTime` in WinUI, so `Mode=OneWay` must be explicitly added to maintain dynamic updates.

Reviewer: The word "must" overstates the rule and is contradicted by the same PR. `TappedCommandParameter="{x:Bind}"` (line 182 of MainWindow.xaml) intentionally keeps the `OneTime` default — because the bound value is the `AppItemGroup` object itself, which never changes within the template's lifetime, so `OneTime` is more efficient than `OneWay` there.

The correct guidance is: add `Mode=OneWay` when the bound property can change after the initial bind (i.e. when you need live updates). For static references — the DataContext object itself, `init`-only properties — `OneTime` is the right default and should be kept.

Suggested rewrite:

```suggestion
**Action:** Use `{x:Bind PropertyName, Mode=OneWay}` instead of `{Binding}` for data context properties within `DataTemplate`s. Note that `x:Bind` defaults to `Mode=OneTime`, so add `Mode=OneWay` explicitly when the bound value can change after initial binding. For properties that are stable within the template lifetime (e.g. the DataContext object itself), `OneTime` is preferred — do not add `Mode=OneWay` unnecessarily.
```
